Doc: Add tutorial about using VxWorks as uos (#3071)
projectacrn/acrn-hypervisor: doc/tutorials/using_vxworks_as_uos.rst

.. _using_vxworks_as_uos:

Using VxWorks as User OS
########################

> This tutorial describes how to run VxWorks as the User OS on the ACRN hypervisor. We are using Kaby Lake-based

Reviewer: Can you add a link to the VxWorks product page here: https://www.windriver.com/products/vxworks/?

@dbkinder we probably need to add the copyright sign somewhere (at least once)?

You can add this line at the bottom of your file:
```
.. _VxWorks: https://www.windriver.com/products/vxworks/
```

And then re-use that link using
```
`VxWorks`_
```
throughout the doc

Author: Thanks for your comment. Will do.

NUC (model NUC7i5DNHE) in this tutorial. Other :ref:`ACRN supported platforms <hardware>` should work as well.

Introduction to VxWorks
***********************

VxWorks is a real-time operating system (RTOS) that can be used in embedded systems. It can be customized easily

> and run on most processors designed for distributed computing.

Reviewer: Perhaps we could also use Windriver's own description of VxWorks here, indicating we're quoting them, e.g.:
```
Quoting Wind River's product page: VxWorks®, the industry’s leading real-time operating system, delivers all the performance, determinism, reliability, safety, and security capabilities you need to meet the highest standards for running the computing systems of the most important critical infrastructure.
```

Author: Sure. Will do.

Steps for Using VxWorks as User OS
**********************************

#. Build VxWorks

   Follow the `VxWorks Getting Started Guide <https://docs.windriver.com/bundle/vxworks_7_tutorial_kernel_application_workbench_sr0610/page/rbu1422461642318.html>`_
   to setup the VxWorks development environment and build the VxWorks Image.

   .. note::
      The following kernel configuration should be excluded:
        * INCLUDE_PC_CONSOLE
        * DRV_SIO_PCI_NS16550
        * SELECT_PC_CONSOLE_KBD

      The following kernel configuration should be included:
        * DRV_SIO_IA_NS16550
        * DRV_SIO_FDT_NS16550

      The following kernel configuration value should be set:
        * CONSOLE_BAUD_RATE = 115200
        * SYS_CLK_RATE_MAX = 1000

#. Build GRUB2 BootLoader Image

   We use grub-2.02 as the bootloader of VxWorks in this tutorial. You may gave other version of GRUB2 a try.
   We can download the grub-2.02 from `ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/grub/grub-2.02.tar.gz`.

   .. code-block:: none

>       $ zcat grub-2.02.tar.gz | tar xvf -

Reviewer: How about this single-line to download and extract Grub 2.02 sources?
```
curl ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/grub/grub-2.02.tar.xz | tar xJv
```

Author: Great.

      $ cd grub-2.02
      $ ./autogen.sh
      $ ./configure --with-platform=efi --target=x86_64
      $ make
      $ ./grub-mkimage -p /EFI/BOOT -d ./grub-core/ -O x86_64-efi -o grub_x86_64.efi \
            boot efifwsetup efi_gop efinet efi_uga lsefimmap lsefi lsefisystab \
            exfat fat multiboot2 multiboot terminal part_msdos part_gpt normal \
            all_video aout configfile echo file fixvideo fshelp gfxterm gfxmenu \
            gfxterm_background gfxterm_menu legacycfg video_bochs video_cirrus \
            video_colors video_fb videoinfo video net tftp

   Then we will get ``grub_x86_64.efi`` in current directory.

#. Preparing the Boot Device

   .. code-block:: none

      $ dd if=/dev/zero of=VxWorks.img bs=1M count=35
      $ mkfs.vfat -F 32 VxWorks.img
      $ sudo mount `sudo losetup -f -P --show VxWorks.img` /mnt

>     Create the following directories.

Reviewer: This shows up as code, I _think_ because you have one too many space at the beginning of the line, it should be aligned with the `P` from `Preparing the Boot Device`

Author: Will fix it.

   .. code-block:: none

      $ sudo mkdir -p /mnt/efi/boot
      $ sudo mkdir -p /mnt/kernel

   Copy ``vxWorks`` and ``grub_x86_64.efi``.

   .. code-block:: none

      $ sudo cp vxWorks /mnt/kernel/
      $ sudo cp grub-2.02/grub_x86_64.efi /mnt/efi/boot/bootx64.efi

   Create ``/mnt/efi/boot/grub.cfg`` containing the following:

   .. code-block:: console

      set default=0
      set timeout=5

      menuentry "VxWorks Guest" {
          mutiboot /kernel/vxWorks

>       }

Reviewer 2: typo: mutiboot --> multiboot

Author: Thanks for your comment. Will fix in next version.

   Unmount the loopback device:

   .. code-block:: none

      $ sudo umount /mnt

   You now have a virtual disk image with bootable VxWorks in ``VxWorks.img``. If the VxWorks build system
   is not the ACRN SOS, then you will need to transfer this image to ACRN SOS (via, e.g, a USB stick or network)

#. Follow :ref:`getting-started-apl-nuc` to boot "The ACRN Service OS".

#. Boot VxWorks as User OS.

   On the ACRN SOS, prepare a directory and populate it with VxWorks files.

   .. code-block:: none

      $ mkdir vxworks && cd vxworks
      $ cp /usr/share/acrn/samples/nuc/launch_vxworks.sh .
      $ cp /usr/share/acrn/bios/OVMF.fd .

   You will also need to copy the ``VxWorks.img`` created in the above section into directory ``vxworks``.

   Run the ``launch_vxworks.sh`` script to launch VxWorks as Uos.

   .. code-block:: none

>       $sudo ./launch_vxworks.sh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      $ sudo ./launch_vxworks.sh
```

Author: Will fix it.

.. _using_vxworks_as_uos:

> Using VxWorks as User OS

Reviewer 3: VxWorks is a trademark of WindRiver, so add an asterisk  ``VxWorks*`` on this first reference and adjust the title underline.  We don't need to add an asterisk anywhere else in this document.

Author: Will do.

########################

> This tutorial describes how to run `VxWorks`_ as the User OS on the ACRN hypervisor. We are using Kaby Lake-based

Reviewer 3: Let's change this first sentence (so we can delete the next section):
```
`VxWorks`_\* is a real-time proprietary OS designed for use
in embedded systems requiring real-time, deterministic performance.
This tutorial describes how to run VxWorks as the User OS
on the ACRN hypervisor.
```

Author: Will change it in next version.

NUC (model NUC7i5DNHE) in this tutorial. Other :ref:`ACRN supported platforms <hardware>` should work as well.

> 

Reviewer 3: As a proprietary OS,  you need to buy a copy of VxWorks, right?  You should mention this as a prerequisite of this tutorial.  Maybe this:
```
.. note:: You'll need to be a WindRiver* customer and have purchased VxWorks to follow this tutorial.
```

Author: Will add it in next version.

> Introduction to VxWorks

Author: Will delete it in next version.

***********************

VxWorks®, the industry’s leading real-time operating system, delivers all the performance, determinism, reliability,
safety, and security capabilities you need to meet the highest standards for running the computing systems of the most
important critical infrastructure.

Steps for Using VxWorks as User OS
**********************************

> #. Build VxWorks

Reviewer 3: Where should you do this building work?  Later in this doc, you mention doing all this work on the NUC (in a terminal window on the Service OS), so you should mention this here as the recommended method.  (You can also mention you can do this work on some other Linux system, but extra steps will be needed to get the bootable image we're creating onto the NUC.)

Author: Actually we should build VxWorks on some other linux system.
I will delete the confusing words.

>    Follow the `VxWorks Getting Started Guide <https://docs.windriver.com/bundle/vxworks_7_tutorial_kernel_application_workbench_sr0610/page/rbu1422461642318.html>`_

Reviewer 3: I get an error when I follow this link: You are not permitted to view this content 
or you need to login in order to access.  Do you need to buy VxWorks (and have an account) to do this tutorial?

Author: Yeah. We need buy it. I will add the note you suggested above.

   to setup the VxWorks development environment and build the VxWorks Image.

   .. note::

>       The following kernel configuration should be excluded:

Reviewer 3: Let's make the excluded and included words bold:
```suggestion
      The following kernel configuration should be **excluded**:
```

Author: Will fix it.

        * INCLUDE_PC_CONSOLE
        * DRV_SIO_PCI_NS16550
        * SELECT_PC_CONSOLE_KBD

>       The following kernel configuration should be included:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      The following kernel configuration should be **included**:
```

Author: Will fix it.

        * DRV_SIO_IA_NS16550
        * DRV_SIO_FDT_NS16550

      The following kernel configuration value should be set:
        * CONSOLE_BAUD_RATE = 115200
        * SYS_CLK_RATE_MAX = 1000

#. Build GRUB2 BootLoader Image

>    We use grub-2.02 as the bootloader of VxWorks in this tutorial. You may gave other version of GRUB2 a try.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   We use grub-2.02 as the bootloader of VxWorks in this tutorial; other versions may also work.
```

Author: Will fix it.

   .. code-block:: none

      $ curl ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/grub/grub-2.02.tar.xz | tar xJv
      $ cd grub-2.02
      $ ./autogen.sh
      $ ./configure --with-platform=efi --target=x86_64
      $ make
      $ ./grub-mkimage -p /EFI/BOOT -d ./grub-core/ -O x86_64-efi -o grub_x86_64.efi \
            boot efifwsetup efi_gop efinet efi_uga lsefimmap lsefi lsefisystab \
            exfat fat multiboot2 multiboot terminal part_msdos part_gpt normal \
            all_video aout configfile echo file fixvideo fshelp gfxterm gfxmenu \
            gfxterm_background gfxterm_menu legacycfg video_bochs video_cirrus \
            video_colors video_fb videoinfo video net tftp

>    Then we will get ``grub_x86_64.efi`` in current directory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   This will build a ``grub_x86_64.efi`` image in the current directory.
```

Author: Will fix it.

#. Preparing the Boot Device

   .. code-block:: none

      $ dd if=/dev/zero of=VxWorks.img bs=1M count=35
      $ mkfs.vfat -F 32 VxWorks.img
      $ sudo mount `sudo losetup -f -P --show VxWorks.img` /mnt

   Create the following directories.

   .. code-block:: none

      $ sudo mkdir -p /mnt/efi/boot
      $ sudo mkdir -p /mnt/kernel

   Copy ``vxWorks`` and ``grub_x86_64.efi``.

   .. code-block:: none

      $ sudo cp vxWorks /mnt/kernel/
      $ sudo cp grub-2.02/grub_x86_64.efi /mnt/efi/boot/bootx64.efi

   Create ``/mnt/efi/boot/grub.cfg`` containing the following:

>    .. code-block:: console

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   .. code-block:: none
```

      set default=0
      set timeout=5

      menuentry "VxWorks Guest" {
          multiboot /kernel/vxWorks
      }

   Unmount the loopback device:

   .. code-block:: none

      $ sudo umount /mnt

   You now have a virtual disk image with bootable VxWorks in ``VxWorks.img``. If the VxWorks build system
   is not the ACRN SOS, then you will need to transfer this image to ACRN SOS (via, e.g, a USB stick or network)

> #. Follow :ref:`getting-started-apl-nuc` to boot "The ACRN Service OS".

Reviewer 3: This referenced document describes how to install and boot Clear Linux as the SOS and start up a Clear Linux-based UOS.  If you're recommending that all this work be done on the NUC in a SOS terminal window, this step isn't needed.  (Unless your recommendation is to NOT do this work on the NUC.)

#. Boot VxWorks as User OS.

   On the ACRN SOS, prepare a directory and populate it with VxWorks files.

   .. code-block:: none

      $ mkdir vxworks && cd vxworks
      $ cp /usr/share/acrn/samples/nuc/launch_vxworks.sh .
      $ cp /usr/share/acrn/bios/OVMF.fd .

>    You will also need to copy the ``VxWorks.img`` created in the above section into directory ``vxworks``.

Reviewer 3: You didn't provide the command to do this (as you did for all the other steps).

Author: This image locates in other machine. We can transfer it to the ACRN SOS through a USB stick or network. But it is hard to provide the command to do this.

   Run the ``launch_vxworks.sh`` script to launch VxWorks as Uos.

   .. code-block:: none

      $ sudo ./launch_vxworks.sh

   Then VxWorks will boot up automatically. You will see the prompt.

   .. code-block:: console

                     VxWorks 7 SMP 64-bit

      Copyright 1984-2019 Wind River Systems, Inc.

            Core Kernel version: 1.2.7.0
                     Build date: May  5 2019 21:40:28
                          Board: x86 Processor (ACPI_BOOT_OP) SMP/SMT
                      CPU Count: 1
                 OS Memory Size: ~1982MB
               ED&R Policy Mode: Permanently Deployed

      Adding 9315 symbols for standalone.

      ->

> 

Reviewer 3: After you boot, what should you do?  (Can you provide some commands that show VxWorks is running as expected?)
